I'd like to draw your attention this morning to the twenty third Psalm. This is a portion of
Scripture that I am quite certain is well known to most if not all of you. Psalm twenty three is
probably the most familiar to God's people out of all the one hundred fifty in the Psalter. It's usually
one of the first Scripture portions a child ever learns at the beginning of life and at the
same time, it's very often the last portion quoted to or by a saint of God drawing near to
the end of life. This is a passage of God's word that is regularly read at the bedside of a
sick person. I have done so many times myself in my ministry and it is recited often at
many a funeral service.
The Psalm sets before us the beautiful picture of the Lord as the Shepherd, the Shepherd
who guides and directs and leads his sheep while the Scripture, even the book of Psalms,
emphasizes the truth that God's people collectively are the sheep of his pasture. For
example, in Psalm one hundred, it uses the collective pronoun "we" are his sheep, yet this Psalm
is more personal. It is the individual believer who is seen in this relationship with his
Lord. It begins, "The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want," and the personal pronoun
is employed throughout. You see the references there to "me" and to "my" and to "I." It is
not only true that the Lord is a Shepherd or even that he is the Shepherd but for God's
child, the great assurance is this: the Lord is my shepherd.
Now, one of the features of shepherding in the Eastern culture is the way in which the
shepherd leads his sheep. He walks ahead or in front of the flock to search out the best
paths for their feet and the luscious and greenest feeding grounds. The Shepherd is seen
here as leading the sheep in green pastures. You see that in verse two, "He maketh me to lie
down in green pastures." The word really is "in pastures of tender grass." He leads the
sheep to these lush feeding grounds because he is their Shepherd and the word
"shepherd" could also be translated "feeder" or "pastor." That's what a true pastor is, a
shepherd, a feeder of the flock.
In Psalm twenty three, therefore, the Shepherd is seen as one who feeds his sheep but who also
leads the sheep and as the sheep follows his Shepherd, he is led beside the still waters
into the green pastures and in paths of righteousness. But you'll notice in the fourth verse
that the Shepherd also leads his sheep into the valley of the shadow of death. The sheep is
not always on the hilltop enjoying the clear and bright sunshine, sometimes the Shepherd
leads through valleys where there is no sun shining and where there are terrors and
dangers aplenty and the constant threat of molestation from wild beasts of prey. And
that's the subject of verse four, "Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me."
You'll note that up to this point in the Psalm, David has been speaking of the Lord and of
his guidance and his providing but here as a sheep, so to speak, he is speaking to the
Shepherd and he said, "For thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me."
If I can speak personally here and I know you will excuse that, my experience in recent
days has been that for that sheep being led through the valley of the shadow of death and
I have witnessed my father and indeed other believers being led by the Shepherd through
the dark valley of the shadow. In the very same facility where my father was being cared
for, in the next room was a Christian lady, a friend, and that lady in there, I had the joy of
ministering to her as well as to my own dad. I visited her in fact, for the last time there
just on Wednesday and I heard yesterday that she went to be with the Lord, led through
the valley of the shadow of death. The subject of death has been very much on my mind
for obvious reasons but I can also testify to the leading of the great Shepherd, his guiding
and providing in such a time and so I want to direct your attention today to these
wonderful words of the Shepherd's Psalm, especially those of verse four and while I'm
preaching to my own heart, I'm also preaching from my own heart to your heart and I
trust the Lord will bless our meditation. I want to dedicate this message to my late,
departed father, William, known better as Billy Hamilton who has gone to be with Christ
which is far better.
I want you to notice some things in verse four with me today. In this text, mention is made
of a dark passage. It's called "the valley of the shadow of death." We know that the holy
land is described as a land of hills and valleys and that's where David was a Shepherd and
I'm sure that as a Shepherd, he experienced oftentimes different experiences: hilltop
experiences, valley experiences. Everything was not always for him plain sailing. But
David had a mind here in this text, one of the dark valleys in the terrain from which he
led his own sheep. David was a shepherd himself. He knew very well the ways of sheep
and he also had a shepherd's heart and he was familiar with the task of a shepherd and
what he's doing here in Psalm twenty three is speaking about what God was to him, what he had
been to his own flock as a shepherd, David realized God was to him. What David did for
his own sheep, the Lord did for him as his Shepherd and sometimes as David well knew,
the shepherd has to lead his sheep through dark places and, therefore, this phrase can be
applied to a believer's distresses. Believers have distresses. They have troubles. They
have trials. We are not immune to the afflictions that come upon other men and there are
specific and special trials that believers have that other men do not have. But we think
about a believer's distresses, on the way to glory, we have dark valleys to pass through.
There are trials. There are times of distress. The Lord Jesus said to his disciples in John
sixteen thirty three, "In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the
world." In the world ye shall have tribulation. It's something that's going to happen. You
will have trials. You will have troubles. In Acts fourteen twenty two it says that there were those who
were, "Confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the faith,
and that we must," notice that, the imperative, "we must through much tribulation enter
into the kingdom of God."
Now, the sheep are not keen on dark places but they have got to go through them to get to
that place where there Shepherd is leading them and so it is in our lives. If you turn with
me to first Peter, the first epistle of Peter in chapter one, it speaks there of our salvation and of
the great hope that we have of an inheritance incorruptible in heaven but of this salvation,
Peter says in verse six of chapter one, "Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season,
if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations," and manifold temptations
simply signifies different kinds of trials or many trials and tribulations. The word
"heaviness" is used there. It really signifies "sadness or sorrow; dejection of mind or
depression of spirit." Ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations or trials. It really
means being under the load of a trial. You're bearing that heavy load and we know that
there's always a purpose in the dark passages of life. They are deemed necessary in God's
purpose for us and it is the Lord who decides, by the way, if we need this or that trial.
That is why verse six there talks about, "Though now for a season, if need be," and it's not
for you to decide whether you need this in your life or not, it's God who decides and it is
he who has decided when those trials come upon you that it is needed. God knows what
we need and when we need it.
If I could speak of my dad, he had many trials to face in his life, not just in later life,
much of those things to do with his health. It did seem especially so in recent years but he
had tremendous trials to endure, not least the trial of losing his eyesight virtually. He had
advanced macular degeneration. It seemed to get very much worse until even in his latter
days when it looked as though his eyes were wide open, he was actually asleep. He'd
become virtually blind. That was a great trial to him. The passing of my mother about eighteen
months or so before him was a severe trial to him and yet his attitude at that time was,
"We will just have to face it." Those were his words to me, "We'll have to face it." And
he did with great courage, with great fortitude, by the grace of God. But I want you to
notice that trial and trouble is only to return to the words of Peter "for a season." Do you
see that? Wherefore you greatly rejoice, though now for a season. That's a limited period
of time, not forever but for a season. The sheep has to walk through the valley, "Yea,
though I walk through the valley," the Psalmist says. He doesn't stay in the valley. He's
passing through the dark passage. He's not staying in it. He will come out of it eventually
and, therefore, we can say, "Yes, there are distresses to face in life as a Christian but don't
allow the distresses to get you down because God will bring you through them and you
will look back on it all with the light." Hebrews twelve reminds us in verse eleven, "Now no
chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless afterward it
yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby."
God, I would say to you always has an afterward. There is always an afterward. And with
the writer of that lovely hymn, we can say,
"I’ll bless the hand that guided, I’ll bless the heart that planned
When throned where glory dwelleth in Immanuel’s land."
Sometimes we'll understand. I believe this phrase can also apply to a believer's death as
well as a believer's distresses. "Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
death." Every single one of us here will have to walk this dark passage unless the Lord
Jesus comes for us first because, you see, it is appointed unto man once to die and people
live as though they're never going to die but the reality is that death awaits us all. We're
sure of it. They always say don't they, "Two things that you're sure of in this life: death
and taxes." Well, death is even more sure than taxes. You can't escape death. You can
dodge the taxman if you're so inclined and you feel like going to prison but you can't
dodge death. It will come. Its appointed. The book of Job says much about the frailty of
life and says much about death and I read in Job chapter ten, in the closing verses, verses
twenty through twenty two, "Are not my days few? cease then, and let me alone, that I may take
comfort a little, Before I go whence I shall not return, even to the land of darkness and
the shadow of death; A land of darkness, as darkness itself; and of the shadow of death,
without any order, and where the light is as darkness."
The valley of the shadow of death. Dad used to say even in recent times that he was not
afraid of dying, it was the flitting that worried him. That's a good old Ulster word,
flitting, which refers to people moving house. Somebody is going to pack up and move to
another place and we say they're flitting and so my dad was just simply saying, "I'm not
afraid of dying, I'm just afraid of the process. It's how I get there. It's what's going to
happen in the intervening period." And that was something that he thought about but, you
know, he need not have worried because the Lord carried him through in peace and there
are many dying saints who have been comforted by the words of verse four, "Yea, though I
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me."
Now, obviously death is not called the last enemy for nothing. That's what the Bible says
in one Corinthians fifteen, the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. Death is a sobering
thing. It's a solemn matter to face up to and it's perfectly natural that we say that we have
some foreboding when it comes to the matter of our death, even as believers. Each person
who dies actually dies alone. Though hundreds might expire at the same moment in time,
each one passes over alone. You will die alone though surrounded perhaps by family and
friends as my dad was. The valley of the shadow is dark and it's lonely but yet in truth,
for a Christian, there is nothing to fear. There is nothing to fear because the Christian, the
child of God will not stay in the valley but as the verse indicates, will pass through the
valley. "Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death."
And then upwards to glory. This was uppermost in Paul's mind when he wrote in two
Corinthians five about his earthly house of this tabernacle being dissolved. He was speaking
of his own body and how that you have to leave this earth and it's a bit like taking a tent
down and moving on. He said, "We have a building of God, a house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens." He spoke a little more about that, verse four about mortality
being swallowed up of life. Then he says in verse six, "Therefore we are always confident,
knowing that, whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord. For we
walk by faith, not by sight. We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from
the body, and to be present with the Lord. Wherefore we labour, that, whether present or
absent, we may be accepted of him." Now, you see those words "present and absent" and
the words in verse six "at home." Those words in verse six "at home" are the same in the
Greek as the word that's translated in verses eight and nine "present." So first eight could be read
like this, "We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and to
be at home with the Lord." At home with the Lord.
I have to say that one of the hardest things for me this past couple of weeks has been
staying in my dad's home. It was my mother's home as well, obviously, and there are a lot
of her things still there. All the dishes are hers. All the stuff in the house, it's hers. The
ornaments, everything, belonged to them both. His clothes are there. His shoes are there.
All his little bits and pieces are there and it's really hard to look at those things and to
think that he's not there. But the supreme thought that was in my mind this last couple of
weeks was that this was their home but now it's a house. It's not a home, it's a house
because they're gone to their real home, their final home. At home with the Lord.
What a wonderful thing it is to realize that sudden death is sudden glory. That's what Paul
was teaching here in verse six of two Corinthians five. We are confident, knowing that whilst
we are at home in the body, we're absent from the Lord but in verse eight, we're willing to be
absent from the body and to be present with the Lord. You look in that verse as closely as
you can for purgatory and you'll not find it. You'll not find limbo in that verse. You'll not
find any kind of other third state but it's absent from the body and immediately it's
present with the Lord. That's the way it is for the believer. Sudden death is sudden glory
and to return to the Psalm, you look carefully for David, it was not, you will note, the
valley of death that he would walk through but the valley of the shadow of death. Oh,
what a comfort there is in that. The valley of the shadow of death. You see, death to
God's child is but a shadow for Christ has actually faced the substance and triumphed
over it for us. That's why in the Bible you read of people like Lazarus or people like
Stephen that they fell asleep. That's why it talks about them also which sleep in Jesus
though God bring with them. It's not talking about soul sleep which is a heresy. It's
talking about those whose bodies are asleep in the earth but they are with the Lord.
But that analogy is a beautiful one. When David had served his own generation by the
will of God, he fell asleep. He just went to sleep. Nothing to fear in that. You know what
it's like when you fall asleep. It happens before you know it and it's like that for the child
of God and for David it was not the valley of death that he was passing through but the
shadow of death. Jesus has abolished death for his people. Listen to these words,
Hebrews two:14-fifteen. What has Christ done? It says, "Forasmuch then as the children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same; that through
death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil; And deliver
them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage." The Lord has
abolished death and brought life and immortality to life through the Gospel, two Timothy
one:ten. Do you know what death is like? It's a bit like a bee that has had its sting removed.
Once that bee has stung a person, it has no more power to hurt others and Paul in one
Corinthians fifteen and in verse fifty five used that analogy of a sting when he said, "O death, where
is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin; and the strength of
sin is the law. But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ." Christ was stung by death but now there is nothing to hurt his child in it.
Now, you think about a shadow. Can a shadow hurt you? Can a shadow hurt you? The
shadow of a fearsome animal might frighten you but it can't hurt you. A dog's shadow can
never bite you and the dark passage of death cannot separate the child of God from his
Savior and his Lord. The Bible puts it like this in Romans eight thirty eight, "For I am persuaded, that
neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord."
"Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death." Yes, there is in this
portion a dark passage in view but there is also a definite peace and that definite peace is
in these words, "I will fear no evil." You know, so many folks today live their lives in
fear. Man's hearts fail them for fear. Some people are tormented by fear. They live in
constant fear of dying, for example, and some of them will stifle their fears and just try
never to think about it and put it on the back burner but then it will eventually become an
issue for them. Fear is a terrible thing, however, and the Bible says that fear hath torment.
Yet I want you to notice in this Psalm twenty three that the Psalmist did not fear any evil, even the
prospect of death itself, because he knew the love of his Shepherd. one John four eighteen, "There is
no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear: because fear hath torment. He that
feareth is not made perfect in love."
Why should a Christian be afraid to die, tell me? Why should a Christian be afraid to die?
Perhaps you would say it's the obvious thing, it's the fear of the unknown because,
frankly, none of us have ever done this before. It's the fear of the unknown, isn't it? One
of the martyrs, I believe it was Thomas Bilney, was facing the prospect of being burned
at the stake for his faith and he looked forward to that prospect with some trepidation and
in his prison cell, he took a candle and he held that lit candle under his finger until he
could smell the flesh burning and he couldn't stand it anymore. It hurt and he thought, "If
I can't stand a candle on my finger, how can I ever go through with being burned alive at
the stake?" But then a fellow prisoner in the cell who was also a Christian, encouraged
him with this truth, he said, "Thomas, God will not give you dying grace until you require
it." You don't need grace to die until you're dying and so the story goes that the great man
died in victory and triumph the next day. Without fear, without trepidation, he went to be
with his Lord.
I think of another Psalm just a few on from the one that we're looking at, Psalm twenty seven and
verse one. He says there, "The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? the
Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?" And in verse three, "Though an
host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear." Christian, you need fear no evil,
even in death, for the Lord will give you his peace. My father witnessed to a relative from
his deathbed, "I am ready but you're not." Are you ready? And he was ready. In truth, my
dad had been ready since February twenty sixth, nineteen fifty six because on that day as he often said through
the years, he wept his way to Calvary.
I have a letter here I want to share with you. It was just sent a few days ago to my sister,
my oldest sister, and the lady who wrote it said, "I was very sorry to learn of your dad's
passing and I extend to you my most sincere sympathy. Of him we can truly say, 'Absent
from the body, present with the Lord.'" Then she gave her apologies for not being able to
come to the funeral because she was going to another funeral that day. 